# Vorlesung am 17.04.2023
Motivation for formal software methods:
Defects can endanger lives, be expensive and hard to patch

Formal methods for verification well-established in other engineering fields;
software engineering lagging behind! Problem is very complex in SWE,
and was often brushed off as most software is not critical.  
This changed with digitalization! More of a concern now.

Software quality is also important and verification can help with it.


## Approaches
### Testing
- Can test against bugs and external faults
- But limited: Can only show errors, not their absence
- Covering all cases very difficult to impossible
- Testing is labour intensive, therefore expensive

### Formal methods
- Cannot fully replace testing!
- Construct formal models - math, automaton theory
- Allows more confidence in a system
- Verification: Is the system according to spec?
- Validation: Is the spec correct?
- FM are complimentary to other methods
- Helps with software quality: teaches writing exact specification, forces
  paying attention to potential edge cases


## Specification
*What a system should do*.

Many types of properties:

- Safety/liveness properties
- Schematic properties (mainly DS)
- Non-functional properties (runtime, memory use, etc)
- Full behavior specification; contract specifying function

Formal proof using specification not meant for verifying entire systems;
mainly useful to supplement testing and improving software quality through
proper specification and guarantees about these specs


## Pitfalls of formal methods
- Creating a good abstract model difficult
- Might miss a requirement or property of the real system that is crucial to
  system modelling (e.g. network latency)
- Can however lead to deep insight into a system

### Tradeoffs
- Exact level of abstraction must be picked
- Finite automatons or concrete program?
- Expressiveness can vary: Simple approximation or complex full behavior spec


## Automation of proof
- Fully automatic: Proof is automatically derived from program and spec
- Semi-automatic: Proof is checked by tools; requires interaction

### SPIN
- Tool for abstracting C into "PROMELA"
- Web interface for tracking properties, invoke verification, report errors
- Close monitoring allows for finding bugs
- Defining meaningful properties hard

## KeY
- Verification of Java
- Was used to verify and find a bug in Android's `sort` for `int`
- Tool support was essential
